- Introduce bash

## Memory copying

It's fine to have large objects in memory.
The trouble comes when we inadvertently copy large things.

We can find out when R copies objects using `tracemem`

```{r}
n = 1e6
x = 1:n

tracemem(x)

# No copy
y = x + 1

# No copy
z = x
```

What happens when I change a single element?

```{r}
# Makes a copy
z[1] = 0L

# No copy!
z[2] = 1L
```

## Homework help

Compressed sparse row

These are a little hard to read because they're 0 based indices, vs 1 based as in R.

```{r}

mc = sparseMatrix(i = c(7, 8), j = c(3, 3), x = c(10, 20))

m = as(mc, "dgeMatrix")

# Fails because it hasn't been implemented. 
mr = as(mc, "dgRMatrix")

# Sometimes you can go around by coercing to an intermediate object.
mr = as(as(m, "matrix"), "dgRMatrix")

# I'm working with the row oriented version.
# In the homework you will work with the column oriented dgCMatrix, which has much better support in the Matrix package.

# They print the same, but they are different inside.
str(mr)
```


# shell

Reference: Software Carpentry [Unix Shell lesson](http://swcarpentry.github.io/shell-novice/)

Next week we're going to start using the cluster.
We interact with cluster through the shell, so I want to introduce you to the idea of the shell, aka terminal, command line.

Today's goals:
- Learn how to look at the help pages
- understand how the shell finds and calls programs
- Write our own programs

The shell is just a command line interface to a computer.
We've talked about this before.

We like it because:
- stable- there are POSIX standards to comply with
- powerful
- easy to automate tasks

Draw the time productivity curve.
Some events that happen:
1. I can't do anything and I have no idea what's going on
2. Finally I did the most basic thing
3. Ok, I'm getting used to this
4. I will never again use a GUI

If you've never used the shell you may well find yourself at this first step.
Take heart, it gets better.
I've basically used nothing but the terminal since 2013.
The reason I made the switch was because I started using servers.
You will start using servers next week.

bash is the most common implementation of a shell, but there are others: ksh, zsh.
For our purposes they aren't all that different- they all have the same basic syntax.

There are a few programs to open a shell.
On a Mac you can use terminal, iterm, iterm2.
These are just different interfaces to the same bash implementation provided by the operating system.

Rstudio also has a terminal window- that's another place to get in.

On Windows you can use git-bash, or the linux subsystem.
Cygwin is also an option.
The Windows DOS command line window and Powershell use different syntax from bash.
The commands I'm demonstrating will not work there.
Maybe Windows people can chime in and say how to access a shell?

Concepts:
- prompt

When I open the shell, it greets me with a prompt.
This is analogous to the interpreter REPL in R or Python.
The computer is sitting there, waiting for me to type in a command and press enter.

My prompt is a little cluttered for the blackboard.
If I know the magic incantation I can change it:

```{bash}
export PS1="$ "
```

If I press enter without any command, then the prompt just returns.
I'll type some command now:

```{bash}
pwd

ls
```

`pwd` stands for 'print working directory', and `ls` for list files.
How did I know that?
Let's open the help page:

```{bash}
man ls
```

This says what the command does.
Let's look at the synopsis:

```
 ls [OPTION]... [FILE]...
```

The options, aka flags, change the behavior of the command.
For example:

```
       -a, --all
              do not ignore entries starting with .
```

`man` pages are usually both comprehensive and incomprehensible.
Reading man pages [builds character](https://riteshjsr.wordpress.com/2011/10/08/recurring-motifs-in-calvin-and-hobbes-building-character/), so you should make it a habit.
It will help you grow as a developer.

This describes an option to list all files, even if they start with a `.` (literal period).
I can use the short form for this:

```{bash}
ls -a
```

Or the long form:

```{bash}
ls --all
```

They both do the same thing, but one is longer and more explicit.

Question: Why make two versions? And why such short, esoteric commands?
Short ones are faster for interactive use, long ones are more readable.
Historically, internet connections were unstable, and latency was higher, which made typing a bunch of commands pretty unattractive.

Question: How do I get help on the help page?

```{bash}
man man
```

Up on the very top we see `manual pager utils`.
`manual` means a reference to help you learn, `utils` some helpful functionality, but what's a pager?

A pager is a way of scrolling through text.
In a web browser we scroll and navigate with the mouse.
With a pager we can scroll and navigate with the keyboard.
- `j` goes down, `k` goes up, one line at a time.
- `/` searches for text. So if we want to find out what `--all` flag means for ls then we can type those characters and press enter.
- `q` exits the pager and returns the prompt.

The actual pager programs are called `more` and `less`

Question: How then could we see all possible keyboard shortcuts for the `less` program?
We could google them.
Or:

```{bash}
man less
```

Where do all these commands come from?

There's nothing magic here, the commands are just executable files, or executables for short.
`which` will point us to the actual executable files behind the scenes.

```{bash}
which ls
```

For me, the command `ls` resolves to `/bin/ls`.
I could call this executable directly:

```{bash}
/bin/ls
```

It does the same thing as if I had just called `ls`.

`/bin` is a directory that holds a bunch of programs.
Let's check it out:

```{bash}
cd /bin
ls
```

We see all kinds of useful utility programs.
Now that we're in this directory, we can just execute these directly:

```{bash}
./ls
```

The `./` in front is for the current directory, so this command says, "execute the program `ls`" that's in the current directory.

The `file` command is useful to see what kind of file it actually is:

```{bash}
file ls
```

On Linux mine says:

```{bash}
ls: ELF 64-bit LSB executable, x86-64, version 1 (SYSV), dynamically linked, interpreter /lib64/ld-linux-x86-64.so.2, for GNU/Linux 2.6.32, BuildID[sha1]=d0bc0fb9b3f60f72bbad3c5a1d24c9e2a1fde775, stripped
```

Translation- this file has been compiled, and is now a binary executable.

Point: Commands are just executable files that the shell knows how to find.

The shell knows how to find these programs based on the environment variable `PATH`.
Let's look at the value of this variable:

```{bash}
echo $PATH
```

This lists all the directories where the shell should look for commands.
First the shell looks in the first directory, and if it doesn't find the program there then it moves on to the second, and so on.
The `which` command simulates this, and shows you which commands are actually being used.
When we try to use a command that doesn't exist, it means that the shell went through all the locations on the `PATH` and came back with nothing:

```{bash}
change_my_babies_diaper
change_my_babies_diaper: command not found
```

Question: What would happen if I set my `PATH` to nothing?
Then I wouldn't be able to use any commands, unless I gave the absolute path.

```{bash}
export PATH=""
```

All I have left are those commands which are [builtin to bash itself](https://www.gnu.org/software/bash/manual/html_node/Shell-Builtin-Commands.html#Shell-Builtin-Commands). 

To get myself out of this fix I'm going to just close this shell window and open a new one.
No lasting damage.

## Back to R

We can make our own executables.
Consider a 'hello world' R program saved in the file `hello.R`:

```{r}
message("hello STA141C")
```

Question: How do we run an R script?
We can do it from within the R interpreter:
```{r}
source("hello.R")
```

We can also execute this program from the command line using the `Rscript` command:

```{bash}
Rscript hello.R
```

This runs all the commands in `hello.R`.


It runs, and displays the message inside the file.

I would like to just execute this file directly, just like with the `ls` program.
How can I do this?
First, let's try it and see what happens.
Here's how we would like to call it:

```{bash}
./hello.R
```


I get a `Permission denied` error.

There are three types of permissions on files: read, write, and execute.
The permission error is because I don't have permission to execute.
We can check the permissions on this file with `ls -l`, where the `-l` flag is for 'long'

```{bash}
ls -l hello.R
```

Which displays some useful information, like the file owner, and when the file was last modified:

```
-rw-rw-r-- 1 clark clark 23 Jan 30 15:37 hello.R
```

The `rw`'s on the left hand side are for read and write.
The `x` for execute is missing.
This means that by default, the files that I create are _not_ executable.
Executable files can do pretty much anything on your computer, since it's equivalent to running arbitrary code.
I hope you don't go downloading and running everything that shows up on the internet.
Anyways, it's prudent to be _intentional_ about when we want to execute a script.

We can make the file executable as follows:

```{bash}
chmod +x hello.R
```

Nothing exciting happens, let's see what the permissions look like:

```{bash}
ls -l hello.R
```

Aha, now we see `x`'s appear in the permissions.
Further, when I just run `ls`, the output has some different color to help me differentiate it.
The colors are just formatting.
People customize the colors, and you might not have colors at all, so don't rely on these.
Rely on the actual output of the commands.

Here's a [nice reference on permissions](http://mason.gmu.edu/~montecin/UNIXpermiss.htm)

Now let's see what happens when we try to run it.

```{bash}
./hello.R
```

It's syntax error:

```
./hello.R: line 1: syntax error near unexpected token `"hello world"'
./hello.R: line 1: `message("hello world")'
```

There's nothing wrong with our R code.
The problem is that we didn't make it clear in our file what language this program was written in, and hence which interpreter should be used.
The program behaved as if we had written:

```{bash}
bash hello.R
```

That means, "execute all the commands in hello.R" as if they are bash commands.
So it should all work fine if we actually use bash commands.

```{bash}
echo 'echo "hi from bash"' > hello.sh
chmod +x hello.sh
./hello.sh
```

Wonderful.

Now let's identify our R script as being from the R language.
We do this by adding a "shebang line" in the first line.
This first line tells bash what interpreter to use.
Make a file called `hello2.R` with the following contents:

```{R}
#!/usr/bin/env Rscript
message("hello STA141C")
```

```{bash}
chmod +x hello2.R

./hello2.R
```

Question: So why not just use the file extension, `.R`?
Answer: this mechanism is more specific, and allows for overloading file extensions.
