- Introduce bash

## Memory copying

It's fine to have large objects in memory.
The trouble comes when we inadvertently copy large things.

We can find out when R copies objects using `tracemem`

```{r}
n = 1e6
x = 1:n

tracemem(x)

# No copy
y = x + 1

# No copy
z = x
```

What happens when I change a single element?

```{r}
# Makes a copy
z[1] = 0L

# No copy!
z[2] = 1L
```

## Homework help

Compressed sparse row

These are a little hard to read because they're 0 based indices, vs 1 based as in R.

```{r}

mc = sparseMatrix(i = c(7, 8), j = c(3, 3), x = c(10, 20))

m = as(mc, "dgeMatrix")

# Fails because it hasn't been implemented. 
mr = as(mc, "dgRMatrix")

# Sometimes you can go around by coercing to an intermediate object.
mr = as(as(m, "matrix"), "dgRMatrix")

# I'm working with the row oriented version.
# In the homework you will work with the column oriented dgCMatrix, which has much better support in the Matrix package.

# They print the same, but they are different inside.
str(mr)
```


# shell

Reference: Software Carpentry [Unix Shell lesson](http://swcarpentry.github.io/shell-novice/)

Next week we're going to start using the cluster.
We interact with cluster through the shell, so I want to introduce you to the idea of the shell, aka terminal, command line.

The shell is just a command line interface to a computer.
We've talked about this before.

We like it because:
- stable- there are POSIX standards to comply with
- powerful
- easy to automate tasks

Draw the time productivity curve.
Some events that happen:
1. I can't do anything and I have no idea what's going on
2. Finally I did the most basic thing
3. Ok, I'm getting used to this
4. I will never again use a GUI

If you've never used the shell you may well find yourself at this first step.
Take heart, it gets better.
I've basically used nothing but the terminal since 2013.
The reason I made the switch was because I started using servers.
You will start using servers next week.

bash is the most common implementation of a shell, but there are others: ksh, zsh.
For our purposes they aren't all that different- they all have the same basic syntax.

There are a few programs to open a shell.
On a Mac you can use terminal, iterm, iterm2.
These are just different interfaces to the same bash implementation provided by the operating system.

Rstudio also has a terminal window- that's another place to get in.

On Windows you can use git-bash, or the linux subsystem.
Cygwin is also an option.
The Windows DOS command line window and Powershell use different syntax from bash.
The commands I'm demonstrating will not work there.
Maybe Windows people can chime in and say how to access a shell?

Concepts:
- prompt

When I open the shell, it greets me with a prompt.
This is analogous to the interpreter REPL in R or Python.
The computer is sitting there, waiting for me to type in a command and press enter.

My prompt is a little cluttered for the blackboard.
If I know the magic incantation I can change it:

```{bash}
export PS1="$ "
```

If I press enter without any command, then the prompt just returns.
I'll type some command now:

```{bash}
pwd

ls
```

`pwd` stands for 'print working directory', and `ls` for list files.
How did I know that?
Let's open the help page:

```{bash}
man ls
```

This says what the command does.
Let's look at the synopsis:

```
 ls [OPTION]... [FILE]...
```

The options, aka flags, change the behavior of the command.
For example:

```
       -a, --all
              do not ignore entries starting with .
```

This describes an option to list all files, even if they start with a `.` (literal period).
I can use the short form for this:

```{bash}
ls -a
```

Or the long form:

```{bash}
ls --all
```

They both do the same thing, but one is longer and more explicit.

Question: Why make two versions? And why such short, esoteric commands?
Short ones are faster for interactive use, long ones are more readable.

Question: How do I get help on the help page?

```{bash}
man man
```

Up on the very top we see `manual pager utils`.
`manual` means a reference to help you learn, `utils` some helpful functionality, but what's a pager?

A pager is a way of scrolling through text.
In a web browser we scroll and navigate with the mouse.
With a pager we can scroll and navigate with the keyboard.
- `j` goes down, `k` goes up, one line at a time.
- `/` searches for text. So if we want to find out what `--all` flag means for ls then we can type those characters and press enter.
- `q` exits the pager and returns the prompt.

The actual pager programs are called `more` and `less`

Question: How then could we see all possible keyboard shortcuts for the `less` program?
We could google them.
Or:

```{bash}
man less
```

Where do all these commands come from?

There's nothing magic here, the commands are just executable files, or executables for short.
`which` will point us to the actual executable files behind the scenes.

```{bash}
which less
```


